tiproxy: add tiproxyctl commands and http api (#17658)
pingcap/docs: tiproxy/tiproxy-api.md

---

# TiProxy API

[TiProxy](/tiproxy/tiproxy-overview.md) provides API endpoints for accessing its configuration, health status, and monitoring data.

> **Note:**
>
> TiProxy API is specifically designed for debugging purposes and might not be fully compatible with future capabilities introduced in TiProxy. It's not recommended to include this tool in applications or utilities development to get information.

The address for accessing the TiProxy API is `http://${host}:${port}`, where `host` and `port` are specified by the TiProxy configuration item [`api.addr`](/tiproxy/tiproxy-configuration.md#addr-1). For example:

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:3080/api/admin/config/
```

## Get TiProxy configuration

### Request URI

`GET /api/admin/config/`

### Parameter descriptions

The query parameter is as follows:

- `format`: (optional) specifies the format of the returned configuration. Value options are `json` and `toml`. The default value is `toml`.

### Example

The following example gets the TiProxy configuration in JSON format:

```bash
curl "http://127.0.0.1:3080/api/admin/config/?format=json"
```

## Set TiProxy configuration

> This endpoint is used to modify the TiProxy configuration using the TOML format. Unspecified configuration items will remain unchanged, so you only need to specify the items that you want to modify.

Reviewer: there is a comment for this paragraph in the Chinese PR
https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/17340/files#r1619712746

### Request URI

`PUT /api/admin/config/`

### Request body

> The TiProxy configuration should be provided in TOML format. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to provide the TiProxy configuration in TOML format. For example:
```

```toml
[log]
level='warning'
```

### Example

> The following example sets `log.level` as `"warning"`, while leaving other configuration items unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example sets `log.level` as `'warning'`, while leaving other configuration items unchanged.
```

1. Get the current TiProxy configuration:

    ```bash
    curl http://127.0.0.1:3080/api/admin/config/
    ```

    The output is as follows:

    ```toml
    [log]
    encoder = 'tidb'
    level = 'info'
    ```

> 2. Specify the value of `log.level` in the `test.toml` file and send a `PUT /api/admin/config/` request to update the value of `log.level`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Specify the value of `log.level` in the `test.toml` file, and then send a `PUT /api/admin/config/` request to update the value of `log.level`:
```

    ```shell
    $ cat test.toml
    [log]
    level='warning'
    $ curl -X PUT --data-binary @test.toml http://127.0.0.1:3080/api/admin/config/
    ```

3. Get the modified TiProxy configuration:

    ```bash
    curl http://127.0.0.1:3080/api/admin/config/
    ```

    The output is as follows:

    ```toml
    [log]
    encoder = 'tidb'
    level = 'warning'
    ```

## Get TiProxy health status

> This endpoint is used to get the health status of TiProxy and the checksum of the configuration. When TiProxy is running normally, this endpoint returns the checksum of the configuration. When TiProxy is shutting down, it returns an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This endpoint is used to get the health status of TiProxy and the checksum of the configuration. When TiProxy is running normally, this endpoint returns the checksum of the configuration. When TiProxy is shutting down or offline, it returns an error.
```
